# Object states

An object (e.g. a user or a VPS) can be in one of the following states:

 - active
 - suspended
 - soft deleted
 - hard deleted
 - deleted

Every object can have an expiration date set. When that date passes, the object
advances to the next state.

## Active

The object exists and is available to its owner for use.

## Suspended

When an object is suspended, user interaction with that object (or the
user himself) is blocked.

## Soft deleted

An object is still present on the servers, but it disappears from resource lists
in the API. Admins can still see the object by performing special API call,
which lists objects of some type in this state.

The object can be easily revived, because it is still present in storage.

The object stays in this state for a configured period of time, after which
it advances to the following state.

## Hard deleted

The object is no longer present on storage. It has been deleted and it exists
only in the database for record keeping.

No object can ever be revived from this state.

The object stays in this state also for a configured period of time, which is
much longer, usually several years. After that time the object and all its
dependencies continue to the next state.

## Deleted

The object no longer exists. No trace of it can be found in the database,
except from some external log or non-relational storage.

# API

vpsAdmin defines the following modules:

 - VpsAdmin::API::Lifetimes::Resource - for use in controllers
 - VpsAdmin::API::Lifetimes::Model - for use in models

## State change log

The model module logs all changes of object's state. It logs who has changed it,
why and when.

The resource module defines child resource in the API, which may be used to
browse the log. The log of an object is deleted when the object is deleted from
the database.
