vpsAdmin has a very flexible storage system that takes care of VPS disks,
backups, NAS and more. The storage system is built on top of ZFS.

# The concept
The basic element of the storage system is a dataset (which is indeed a ZFS
dataset). A dataset can be present at multiple storage pools. Storage pools
are created on nodes, be it a hypervisor or a storage.

_Dataset in pool_ refers to one dataset being stored on a storage pool.

Datasets can have snapshots, which can be also present at multiple storage
pools where the dataset is.

## Layouts
Storage pools have assigned roles which determine their layout. There are three
layouts: _hypervisor_, _backup_ and _primary_.

### Hypervisor
Every first-level dataset in a pool is a private area for a VPS.

### Backup
Datasets here are backups of _hypervisor_ or _primary_ pools and the datasets
are branched. Branching is required because of the rollback operation, which
would without branches destroy all snapshots newer then the one rollbacking to.

See [[branching]] for more information.

### Primary
Primary layout is used when the data's primary location is on this pool.
vpsAdmin uses this role for NAS, but it can really be anything.

## Operations
The storage is fully transaction-based. Four basic operations are defined:

 - Snapshot
 - Transfer
 - [[Rollback]]
 - Rotate

### Snapshot
A simple transaction that creates a snapshot of a dataset in pool. The only
catch is that the snapshot name being a date of its creation, the name
is first guessed and the transaction then returns the real name.
That is because the time of an enqueue can differ from the execution time.

### Transfer
Transfer one or more snapshots from one dataset in pool to another dataset
in pool (of the same dataset).

The transfer itself is realized through ``zfs send/recv`` via SSH.

### Rollback
[[Rollback]] restores data from a snapshot that may be stored locally or remotely
on a pool with _backup_ role.

### Rotate
Dataset in pool has some limits as to how many snapshots should be kept.
Rotate removes those old snapshots.

## Repeatable tasks
Very often it is needed to run operations regularily, e.g. snapshot and transfer
every day to a backup server. The storage uses vpsAdmin's task scheduler for that.

## Failure resistance
The storage uses transaction confirmations.

# Usage
Create a pool on a hypervisor node:

	$ vpsadminctl pool create -- --node 1 --name vz --filesystem vz/private
	
Create a pool on a backup server for VPS backups:

	$ vpsadminctl pool create -- --node 5 --name backups --filesystem storage/backup/vps

