.\" Manpage for vpsadmindctl.
.\" Contact jakub.skokan@vpsfree.cz to correct errors or typos.
.TH vpsadmindctl 8 "11 May 2014" "1.20.0" "vpsadmindctl man page"
.SH NAME
vpsadmindctl \- remote control for vpsAdmind

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBvpsadmindctl <command>\fR [\fB-pvh\fR] [\fB-s\fR \fIsocket\fR] ...

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR interacts with vpsAdmind. It can view its status, reload
configuration, control its lifetime and more.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR needs vpsAdmind to be running and with enabled remote control at all
times except for using \fB-h\fR or \fB-v\fR.
.PP
\fBvpsAdmind\fR must be started using system init script or manually,
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR cannot start it.

.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-p\fR, \fB--parsable\fR
Use in scripts, output can be easily parsed.

.TP
\fB-s\fR, \fB--socket\fR \fIsocket\fR
Connect to specified \fIsocket\fR instead of default
\fI/var/run/vpsadmind.sock\fR.

.TP
\fB-v\fR, \fB--version\fR
Print version and exit.

.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Show help and exit.

.SH COMMANDS


\fBchain\fR <\fIid\fR> <\fIsubcommand\fR>
.RS
Browse transaction confirmations of chain \fIid\fR and run them.

\fBSubcommands\fR
.RS
.TP
\fBconfirmations\fR [\fItransaction_id\fR...]
List transaction confirmations.

.TP
\fBconfirm\fR [\fItransaction_id\fR...]
Run transaction confirmations.

.RS
.TP
\fB--direction <\fIdirection\fR>\fR
Set direction in which the confirmations should be run.
\fIdirection\fR can be \fBexecute\fR or \fBrollback\fR.

.TP
\fB--[no]-success\fR
Decide whether the confirmations should be run as if the transaction succeeded or not.
.RE

.TP
\fBrelease\fR [\fBlocks\fR|\fBports\fR]
Release resource locks, reserved ports or both.
.RE

.RE


\fBflush\fR <\fIresource\fR>
.RS
Flush resources. \fIresource\fR may be one of \fBfw\fR, \fBshaper\fR or \fBall\fR.

\fBResources\fR
.RS
.TP
\fBfw\fR
Flush accounting rules from iptables.

.TP
\fBshaper\fR
Flush shaping rules from kernel by \fBtc\fR.

.RE

.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR blocks until the flushing is finished.
.RE


\fBget\fR <\fIsubcommand\fR> [\fB-Hl\fR]
.RS
Access vpsAdmind's resources and properties. When used with option \fB-p\fR,
output is formatted and printed in JSON.

\fBSubcommands\fR
.RS
.TP
\fBconfig\fR [\fIsome.key\fR]
Read and print config. If no argument is specified, print whole config.
.PP
.RS
Using argument \fIsome.key\fR you can select only specific part of config
to be printed. Keys are separated by '\fB.\fR'.
.RE

.TP
\fBqueue\fR
List transactions queued for execution. Transactions whose dependencies are not
met yet are not listed, as it is impossible to know when they will be executed.
.RE

.TP
\fB-H\fR, \fB--no-header\fR
Suppress header row

.TP
\fB-l\fR, \fB--limit\fR \fIn\fR
Limit numer of listed queued transactions to \fIn\fR. Defaults to 50.

.RE


\fBinit\fR <\fIresource\fR>
.RS
Initialize resources. \fIresource\fR may be one of \fBfw\fR, \fBshaper\fR or \fBall\fR.

\fBResources\fR
.RS
.TP
\fBfw\fR
Add iptables rules for traffic accounting.

.TP
\fBshaper\fR
Add shaping rules to kernel with \fBtc\fR.

.RE

.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR blocks until the initialization is finished.
.RE


\fBinstall\fR [\fB--create\fR \fB--addr\fR \fIaddr\fR \fB--location\fR
\fIid\fR|\fIlabel\fR ...] | [\fB--no-create\fR ...]
.RS
Add node to cluster or update node in cluster.
.PP
By default, \fBinstall\fR assumes \fB--create\fR, \fB--no-propagate\fR,
\fB--no-generate-configs\fR and \fB--no-ssh-key\fR.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl install\fR does not modify vpsAdmind's configuration file,
node \fIid\fR must be set in config manually.
.PP
When used with \fB-p\fR, \fBvpsadmindctl install\fR returns \fIid\fR of newly
created or updated node.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR blocks until \fBinstall\fR is finished. It does not wait for
all nodes to regenerate configs though, if you choose to propagate changes.
.TP
\fB--id\fR \fIid\fR
Node \fIid\fR must be a number greater than zero. If \fIid\fR already exists
in database, node's settings are updated.
.PP
.RS
\fIid\fR is automatically assigned by auto increment if omitted or invalid.
.RE

.TP
\fB--name \fIname\fR
Node \fIname\fR.

.TP
\fB--role\fR \fIrole\fR
Node \fIrole\fR might be one of \fBnode\fR, \fBstorage\fR or \fBmailer\fR.
Node roles may have additional specific options. Defaults to \fBnode\fR.

.TP
\fB--location\fR \fIid\fR|\fIlabel\fR
Location \fIid\fR or \fIlabel\fR to put node in. Mandatory in \fB--create\fR
mode.

.TP
\fB--addr\fR \fIaddr\fR
IPv4 address of this node. Mandatory in \fB--create\fR mode.

.TP
\fB--\fR[\fBno-\fR]\fBcreate\fR
Create (or not) new node in database.

.TP
\fB--\fR[\fBno-\fR]\fBpropagate\fR
Propagate (or not) changes to whole cluster. Currently, this includes only
regeneration of known hosts on all nodes.

.TP
\fB--\fR[\fBno-\fR]\fBgenerate-configs\fR
Generate (or not) OpenVZ sample configs for this node. This creates
\fIve-*.conf-sample\fR in \fI/etc/vz/conf\fR.
.PP
.RS
Generate configs only after node filesystem \fItype\fR is set, as each type
may handle configs differently. If you are installing new ZFS node, you have to
run \fBvpsadmindctl install\fR twice. First to set filesystem \fItype\fR and
second to correctly generate configs.
.RE

.TP
\fB--\fR[\fBno-\fR]\fBssh-key\fR
Generate (or not) public and private SSH keys, if they do not exists. This
removes existing keys on this node and replaces them by the shared keys of the
cluster, so that every node can ssh every other node.

.TP
\fBOptions for role \fInode\fR
.RS
.TP
\fB--maxvps\fR \fIcount\fR
Maximum \fIcount\fR of VPS on this node. Defaults to \fB30\fR.

.TP
\fB--ve-private\fR \fIprivate\fR
Path to \fB$VE_PRIVATE\fR. \fB%{veid}\fR is always replaced by current VPS ID.
It is crucial that \fIprivate\fR is correctly set.

.TP
\fB--fstype\fR \fItype\fR
Filesystem type of this node. It might be one of \fBext4\fR, \fBzfs\fR or
\fBzfs_compat\fR. Defaults to \fBext4\fR.
.PP
If you use \fBzfs\fR or \fBzfs_compat\fR, \fIprivate\fR should be in
a subdirectory, for example \fI/vz/private/%{veid}/private\fR, because
\fBvzctl\fP(8) is not ready for it. For \fBext4\fR, use
\fI/vz/private/%{veid}\fR.
.RE

.RE


\fBkill\fR [[\fB-a\fR] | [\fB-t\fR]] [\fIid\fR|\fItype\fR]\fB...\fR
.RS
Kill selected running transactions. This command accepts a list of transaction
\fIids\fR or \fItypes\fR. Arguments are by default treated as transaction
\fIids\fR. Option \fB-t\fR changes that to transaction \fItype\fR.
.PP
This command does not kill transactions
waiting in queue, only those which are currently running.
.PP
Transactions are marked as failed, their error message set to "Killed".
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR blocks until all matching transactions are killed.

.TP
\fB-a\fR, \fB--all\fR
Kill all running transactions, you do not have to provide list of \fIids\fR or
\fItypes\fR.

.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--type\fR
Arguments are transaction \fItypes\fR, not \fIids\fR.
.RE


\fBpause\fR [\fIid\fR]
.RS
Pause execution of queued transactions. Running transactions are finished,
new transactions are not executed until \fBvpsadmindctl resume\fR is called.
.PP
Argument \fIid\fR is optional. If used, execution will be paused after
transaction with id \fIid\fR is finished. Until then, new transactions are
normally executed.
.PP
\fBpause\fR stops the execution of urgent transactions too.
.PP
\fBpause\fR returns immediately. It does not wait for the pause to take effect.
.RE


\fBping\fR
.RS
Check if vpsAdmind is alive.
.PP
Writes 'pong' to stdout and exits with return code 0 on success.
.RE


\fBpry\fR
.RS
Open remote console from vpsAdmind.
.PP
The session can be closed with \fB^D\fR, \fBquit\fR or \fBexit\fR.
.RE


\fBrefresh\fR
.RS
Update info about this node, including kernel version, and all its VPSes and
datasets. Traffic accounting is not updated.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR blocks until refresh is finished.
.RE


\fBreinit\fR
.RS
Reinitialize resources. \fIresource\fR may be one of \fBfw\fR, \fBshaper\fR or \fBall\fR.
The reinitialization is atomic operation.
.PP
See \fBvpsadmindctl init\fR and \fBvpsadmindctl flush\fR for more information.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR blocks until reinit is finished.
.RE


\fBreload\fR
.RS
Instructs vpsAdmind to reload its configuration file.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR does not wait for the reload to actually finish, although it happens
instantly.
.RE


\fBrestart\fR [\fB-f\fR]
.RS
Order vpsAdmind to restart. vpsAdmind will wait for transactions that are running
to finish. It will not execute more transactions.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR does not wait for the restart to finish, it returns immediately.

.TP
\fB-f\fR, \fB--force\fR
Restart vpsAdmind immediately, do not wait for transactions to finish.
All transactions are softly killed and will restart when vpsAdmind is started.
.RE


\fBresume\fR
.RS
Resume transaction execution after it has been paused by \fBvpsadmindctl pause\fR.
\fBresume\fR cancels both immediate and delayed \fBpause\fR.
.PP
\fBresume\fR can also be used to cancel scheduled \fBstop\fR, \fBrestart\fR or
\fBupdate\fR.
.PP
\fBresume\fR returns immediately.
.RE


\fBset\fR <\fIsubcommand\fR>
.RS
Change vpsAdmind's properties. \fBset\fR changes only runtime configuration,
nothing is written to disk.

\fBSubcommands\fR
.RS

.TP
\fBconfig\fR <\fIsome.key\fR\fB=\fR\fIvalue\fR>...
Alter vpsAdmind's configuration. Set key \fIsome.key\fR to \fIvalue\fR. Format of
keys is the same as for \fBget\fR. Multiple keys may be specified, separated
by spaces.

.RE
.RE


\fBstatus\fR [\fB-Hcw\fR]
.RS
Show vpsAdmind's status. If no option is specified, summary is shown.

.TP
\fB-H\fR, \fB--no-header\fR
Do not print header row, useful for scripts.

.TP
\fB-c\fR, \fB--consoles\fR
List exported consoles. Consoles are exported when
accessed from vpsAdmin web interface.

.TP
\fB-m\fR, \fB--mounts\fR
List delayed mounts that vpsAdmind attempts to mount.

.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--subtasks\fR
List subprocesses that block further execution of specific transaction
chains.

.TP
\fB-w\fR, \fB--workers\fR
List transactions and commands that are currently being run.
.RE


\fBstop\fR [\fB-f\fR]
.RS
Order vpsAdmind to exit. vpsAdmind will wait for transactions that are running
to finish. It will not execute more transactions.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR does not wait for the stop to finish, it returns immediately.

.TP
\fB-f\fR, \fB--force\fR
Stop vpsAdmind immediately, do not wait for transactions to finish.
All transactions are softly killed and will restart when vpsAdmind is started
later.
.RE


\fBupdate\fR [\fB-f\fR]
.RS
Stop vpsAdmind, execute git pull and start it again. This command behaves the
same as soft \fIstop\fR. It waits for running transactions to finish.
.PP
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR does not wait for the update to finish, it returns immediately.

.TP
\fB-f\fR, \fB--force\fR
Update vpsAdmind immediately, do not wait for transactions to finish.
All transactions are softly killed and will restart when vpsAdmind is restarted.

.RE


.SH EXAMPLES
\fBStandard usage\fR
.PP
Check how vpsAdmind is doing:
  vpsadmindctl status

Show what transactions and commands are running at the moment:
  vpsadmindctl status -w

Kill two transactions you want to cancel. \fI1234\fR and \fI5678\fR are
transaction \fIids\fR, first column from \fBvpsadmindctl status\fR:
  vpsadmindctl kill 1234 5678

Kill all transactions:
  vpsadmindctl kill -a

Kill all backups (\fI5005\fR is type of regular backup, \fI5006\fR of on-demand
backup, fourth column from \fBvpsadmindctl status\fR):
  vpsadmindctl kill -t 5005 5006

Update vpsAdmind. Do not forget to update also web interface and database scheme
afterwards:
  vpsadmindctl update

Read server ID:
  vpsadmindctl get config vpsadmin.server_id

Change number of concurrent workers:
  vpsadmindctl set config vpsadmin.threads=10

Confirm change:
  vpsadmindctl get config vpsadmin.threads

See what transactions are queued and will be executed, limit count to 10:
  vpsadmindctl get queue -l 10

\fBInstall new ZFS node\fR
.PP
First, configure vpsAdmind so it can access database and start it. It will
complain that node is not registered, ignore that.

Create dataset vz/private and mount it to /vz/private.

When vpsAdmind is running, register node in database, do not create configs:

  vpsadmindctl install --name node1 --role node --location 1 --addr 1.2.3.4
                      --maxvps 30 --fstype zfs_compat
                      --ve-private /vz/private/%{veid}/private
                      --no-propagate --no-generate-configs --no-ssh-key

Now, reload config to discover filesystem type as we have set it:

  vpsadmindctl reload

Give it some time, as \fBvpsadmindctl reload\fR does not block:

  sleep 5

Run install again, this time generate configs and keys:

  vpsadmindctl install --no-create --propagate --ssh-key --generate-configs

Node should be installed and correctly configured.

\fBInstall new EXT4 node\fR
.PP
One \fBvpsadmindctl install\fR will suffice for now, because ext4 is the default filesystem
\fItype\fR in config.

First steps are the same. Configure and start vpsAdmind, then run:

  vpsadmindctl install --name node1 --role node --location 1 --addr 1.2.3.4
                      --maxvps 30 --fstype ext4
                      --ve-private /vz/private/%{veid}
                      --propagate --generate-configs --ssh-key

Node should be installed and correctly configured.

.SH AUTHOR
Jakub Skokan <jakub.skokan@vpsfree.cz>

.SH LICENSE
\fBvpsadmindctl\fR is a part of vpsAdmin project and is released under GNU/GPLv2.
