# Concept
vpsAdmin supports per-IP traffic shaping.

Every hypervisor has configured an outgoing network interface and a maximum allowed throughput.
Each IP address can have different limits for in/out rates.

# Usage
Currently, shaper management is available only via the API, not in the web interface.

Manage node global limits, in bytes per second:

	$ vpsadminctl node update <id> -- --max-tx 100000 --max-rx 200000

Manage per-IP rate limits, in bytes per second:

	$ vpsadminctl ip_address update <id> -- --max-tx 10000 --max-rx 20000

Shaper on a hypervisor can also be controlled with vpsadmindctl.

Remove all qdiscs and classes:

	# vpsadmindctl flush shaper

Initialize shaper and add all rules:

	# vpsadmindctl init shaper

Do the two operations in one step:

	# vpsadmindctl reinit shaper

# Implementation
Shapers are set up on hypervisors using ``tc``.

## Initialize shaper
At vpsAdmind's initialization, root queueing disciplines
and classes for shaping all VPSes are created. In the following example, ``bond210``
is the outgoing interface and 1 800 Mbps is the max rate configured for this hypervisor.

	tc qdisc add dev bond210 root handle 1: htb
	tc qdisc add dev venet0 root handle 1: htb

	tc class add dev venet0 parent 1: classid 1:1 htb rate 1800Mbit ceil 1800Mbit burst 1M
	tc class add dev bond210 parent 1: classid 1:1 htb rate 1800Mbit ceil 1800Mbit burst 1M

These four rules must always be present.

The shaper is not initialized if the network interface is not configured (NULL).

## Changing root classes
Root classes are changed with:

	tc class change dev venet0 parent 1: classid 1:1 htb rate 33Mbps ceil 33Mbps burst 1M
	tc class change dev bond210 parent 1: classid 1:1 htb rate 11Mbps ceil 11Mbps burst 1M

If that fails due to the classes not present, shaper is initialized.

## Per-IP address shaping
Following rules must be set for every IP address to shape. In this example, 300 Mbps is the max in/out rate
for IP 185.8.164.31.

	tc class add dev venet0 parent 1:1 classid 1:10 htb rate 300Mbit ceil 300Mbit burst 300k
	tc class add dev bond210 parent 1:1 classid 1:10 htb rate 300Mbit ceil 300Mbit burst 300k
	
	tc filter add dev venet0 parent 1: protocol ip prio 16 u32 match ip dst 185.8.164.31 flowid 1:10
	tc filter add dev bond210 parent 1: protocol ip prio 16 u32 match ip src 185.8.164.31 flowid 1:10
	
	tc qdisc add dev bond210 parent 1:10 handle 10: sfq perturb 10
	tc qdisc add dev venet0 parent 1:10 handle 10: sfq perturb 10

These rules have class ``1:1`` as a parent, that being the class created during the initialization.
In addition to unique IP address id in the database, which is int32, for the purpose
of shaping there is additional column with int16 id, that is used as a class id (``1:10`` in the example
above).

These 16-bit ids are independent of row ids. They are set on IP address creation. The lowest available id is selected.

### Adding/removing per-IP rules
The hypervisor has rules only for IP addresses that are present. The rules are added/removed at:

 - \+ IP assignment to VPS (includes VPS creation, cloning, swapping),
 - \+ VPS migration to this node,
 - \- IP removed from VPS,
 - \- VPS migration from this node,
 - \- VPS deletion.
 
### Removing rules
It is not possible to remove only filters specific for one IP address. All filters are always deleted.
vpsAdmind then fetches all IP addresses for this node from the database and adds remaining filters anew.

Rules for one IP address are removed as:

	tc qdisc del dev bond210 parent 1:10 handle 10:
	tc qdisc del dev venet0 parent 1:10 handle 10:

	# deletes all filters, impossible to delete just one
	tc filter del dev venet0 parent 1: protocol ip prio 16
	tc filter del dev bond210 parent 1: protocol ip prio 16

	tc class del dev venet0 parent 1:1 classid 1:10
	tc class del dev bond210 parent 1:1 classid 1:10


### Changing shapers
vpsAdmind first tries to change the classes in place. If that fails because the chosen IP address
did not have any limits before, all rules are added.

Atempt to change rules:

	tc class change dev venet0 parent 1:1 classid 1:10 htb rate 100Mbps ceil 100Mbps burst 300k
	tc class change dev bond210 parent 1:1 classid 1:10 htb rate 100Mbps ceil 100Mbps burst 300k

If any of those two commands fails with exit code 2, rules are added again.

## Limitations
It is not possible to change the outgoing network interface the shaper is configured on.
It must be done manually, the procedure is as follows:

 1. ``vpsadmindctl flush shaper``
 2. Change the network interface in vpsAdmin
 3. ``vpsadmindctl reload``
 4. ``vpsadmindctl init shaper``
