# Release notes
Version 2.2.0 is rebased onto HaveAPI v0.5. It significantly increases the
amount of tracked data - resource usage of all nodes and VPSes in time. This
data is later hoped to be used for automated balancing of vpsAdmin cluster.

Another important improvement are VPS outage windows and mass migrations.
Outage window is a user-configurable time in which maintenance, migration or
any kind of outage can take place. Migrations can be made to wait until this
window is open. VPS migrations can now be automated using migration plans, used
e.g. by node evacuation procedure.

This is the last version of vpsAdmind to explicitly support Ruby 1.8.7 and
OpenIndiana/Solaris hosts.

## General
 - Continuous resource tracking of all nodes and VPSes
 - VPS outage windows
 - Migration plans, node evacuation
 - Logging of user actions

## API resources
 - Version set to 2.0
 - `TransactionChain.Transaction` moved to `Transaction`
 - Added more output parameters with resource usage to `Vps` and `Node`
 - New resources `Vps.Status`, `Node.Status` and `Dataset.PropertyHistory`
 - New resources `MigrationPlan` and `MigrationPlan.VpsMigration`
 - New resource `Vps.OutageWindow`
 - New resource `ObjectHistory`
 - `Node.PublicStatus` has new parameters `kernel` and `cpu_idle`

## API internals
 - Migration plans, node evacuation
 - New rake task `vpsadmin:vps:migration:run_plans`
 - VPS outage windows
 - Optionally notify users about VPS migrations via e-mail
 - Tracking user's actions using `ObjectHistory`, used for `Vps`
 - Resource locks are polymorphic - other objects than `TransactionChain` can
   use them
 - `Vps::Reinstall` and `Vps::Restore` continue even if VPS start fails
 - `Vps::Clone` avoids local clone
 - New method `TransactionChain.fire2` used to provide additional parameters
 - New transaction chain `TransactionChains::MigrationPlan::Mail`
 - New transactions
   - `Transactions::OutageWindow::Wait` - wait for the outage window to open
   - `Transactions::OutageWindow::InOrFail` - fail if not inside the outage window
   - `Transactions::Queue::Reserve` - reserve a slot in a queue
   - `Transactions::Queue::Release` - release a reserved slot in a queue

## vpsAdmin-client
 - New command `vps migrate_many`

## vpsAdmind
 - System probes to read more information about both nodes and VPSes:
   - Memory
   - CPU
   - Disk space
   - ARC
   - Kernel version
   - Load average
   - Process counter
   - Uptime
   - Number of CPUs
 - Use polymorphic resource locks
 - Fixed rollback of transactions killed using the remote command
 - New queues `outage` and `queue`
 - Queue slot reservation mechanism

## vpsAdmindctl
 - Show transaction queue reservations

# Upgrade instructions
## vpsAdmin API
Stop the API and the scheduler.

	# cd /opt/vpsadmin-api
	# git pull
	# bundle install
	# rake db:migrate

Restart both the API and the scheduler.

Set key `api_url` in sysconfig.

## vpsAdmind
On all nodes:

	# vpsadmindctl update
	# cd /opt/vpsadmindctl && git pull

## vpsAdmin web UI

	# git pull
	# php composer.phar update
