# Release notes
Version 2.3.0 focuses on improving snapshot downloading and off-site backups.
It is now possible to download ZFS data streams directly, even incrementally.
The CLI client supports snapshot downloads explicitly, in several variants.

- `snapshot download [<id>] [-- [options]]` can download snapshot into a file
- `snapshot send <id> [-- [options]]` is an imitation of `zfs send` and thus can
  be used in the same way
- `backup dataset [<id>] <filesystem> [-- [options]]` can autonomously download
  remote snapshots and store them locally in a dataset
- `backup vps [<id>] <filesystem> [-- [options]]` is an extension of the
  previous command focused on backuping VPS

All these commands begin the download immediately, they do not have to wait until
the file on the server is complete. When downloading into a file, the program can
be interrupted and resume the download later. All commands by default calculate
the checksum and verify it, assuring that the downloaded data is correct.

`backup` commands are designed to run periodically by cron. The program itself
will decide whether it can download an incremental stream or whether it needs
a full one.

## General
- Download snapshots as ZFS (incremental) data stream
- Snapshot history identifier

## API resources
- `Dataset.Snapshot` has new output parameters `name` and `history_id`
- `SnapshotDownload` has new parameters `format`, `sha256sum` and `send_mail`
- `Dataset` has new parameter `current_history_id`

## API internals
- Save snapshot names in UTC
- `TransactionChain#append`: add option queue
- `TransactionChain.Index`: fix ambiguous column name in DB query

## vpsAdmin web UI
- Show history identifier in snapshot list
- Select format of the downloaded snapshot

## vpsAdmin-client
- `vps migrate_many` has new option `--[no-]cleanup-data`
- New commands
  - `snapshot download`
  - `snapshot send`
  - `backup dataset`
  - `backup vps`

## vpsAdmind
- Confirm attribute `created_at` after snapshot creation
- Save snapshot name and time of creation in UTC
- Ability to export ZFS (incremental) data streams
- Compute and save checksum of files for download

# Upgrade instructions
Standard upgrade process.
