# Release notes
Version 2.1.0 is rebased onto HaveAPI v0.4 and features mainly reworked
[[remote VPS console|vps/remote_console]]. The console can be accessed using
CLI tool `vpsadminctl`, which works much better than the web-based console,
as it uses your own terminal emulator. The VPS console now also supports resizing.

## General
- VPS hostname can be managed manually and vpsAdmin will merely read it

## API resources
 - Version set to 1.0
 - Removed parameter `User.playground_enabled`
 - `Cluster.PublicStats.ipv4_left` does not count owned IP addresses

## API internals
 - `TransactionChain#append_t` to gradually replace `TransactionChain#append`
 - `TransactionChains::User::HardDelete` deletes all user's datasets completely
 - `TransactionChains::DatasetTree::Destroy` corretcly destroys all branches
   and snapshots
 - New transaction `Vps::UnmanageHostname`
 - Switch to yard from rdoc
 - Update and complete dependencies in the `Gemfile`

## Web UI
 - VPS hostname form to support manual and managed modes
 - Removed `DB_VERSION` constant

## vpsAdmind
 - VPS console mostly rewritten
 - New communication protocol with the console router
 - `vzctl console` run in a pty using wrapper script
 - Support console resizing
 - Support transaction `Vps::UnmanageHostname`
 - Read hostname from VPSes that manage them manually
 - VPS status
   - run exec commands only if the VPS is running
   - exclude VPSes in state `hard_delete`

## Console router
 - Moved from vpsAdmind to a standalone project
 - Disconnect from the database after a period of inactivity
 - Disable caching by adding timestamp parameter to JS scripts
 - Implemented the reconnect button in web console
 - Updated protocols with clients and vpsAdmind
 - Transport console size

## vpsAdmin-client
 - Renamed from `vpsadminctl` to `vpsadmin-client`
 - Subcommand `vps remote_console <vps_id>`

# Upgrade instructions
## vpsAdmin API
Stop the API and the scheduler.

	# cd /opt/vpsadmin-api
	# git pull
	# bundle install
	# rake db:migrate

Restart both the API and the scheduler.

Set key `api_url` in sysconfig.

## vpsAdmind
On all nodes:

	# vpsadmindctl update
	# cd /opt/vpsadmindctl && git pull

## Console router
The router has been extracted from vpsAdmind and made a standalone project. You
need to install it next to vpsAdmind and adjust start scripts accordingly.

## vpsAdmin web UI

	# git pull
	# php composer.phar update

# Known issues
In order for the console resizing to work, a
[[patched|vps/remote_console/vzctl-console.patch]] version of `vzctl` is needed.
